hile spoken or signed language is a more or less universal human competence
that has been characteristic of the species from the beginning and that is
commonly acquired by human beings without systematic instruction, writing is a
technology of relatively recent history that must be taught to each generation
of children. Historical accounts of the evolution of writing systems have until
recently concentrated on a single aspect, increased efficiency, with the Greek
invention of the alphabet being regarded as the culmination of a long historical
evolution. This efficiency is a product of a limited and manageable set of
graphs that can express the full range of meanings in a language. As the British
classicist Eric A. Havelock wrote, The Polish American Assyriologist Ignace Gelb
distinguished four stages in this evolution, beginning with picture writing,
which expressed ideas directly; followed by word-based writing systems; then by
sound-based syllabic writing systems, including unvocalized syllabaries or
consonantal systems; and concluding with the Greek invention of the alphabet.

The invention of the alphabet is a major achievement of Western culture. It is
also unique; the alphabet was invented only once, though it has been borrowed by
many cultures. It is a model of analytic thinking, breaking down perceptible
qualities like syllables into more basic constituents. And because it is capable
of conveying subtle differences in meaning, it has come to be used for the
expression of a great many of the functions served by speech. The alphabet
requires little of the reader beyond familiarity with its orthography. It allows
the reader to decipher words newly encountered and permits the invention of
spellings for new patterns of sound, including proper names (a problem that is
formidable for nonalphabetic systems). Finally, its explicitness permits readers
to make a relatively sharp distinction between the tasks of deciphering and
interpreting. Less explicit orthographies require the reader first to grasp the
meaning of a passage as a whole in order to decide which of several possible
word meanings a particular graphic string represents.

It must be remembered, however, that efficiency depends not only on the nature
of the writing system but also on the functions required of it by its users, for
orthographies are invented to serve particular cultural purposes. Furthermore,
an orthography invented to satisfy one purpose may acquire new applications. For
instance, writing systems invented to serve mnemonic purposes were subsequently
elaborated and used for communicative and archival purposes. Orthographies were
not invented as art forms, but, once invented, they could serve aesthetic
functions.

Notions of explicitness of representation depend on the morphophonemic structure
of the language. An alphabet was a notable advance for representing the Greek
language but not necessarily for representing a Semitic language. Moreover, for
languages such as Chinese and Japanese, which have simple syllabic structures
and a great number of homophones, a writing system that depended on phonological
structure, such as a syllabary or an alphabet, would be extremely inefficient.
It is with such factors in mind that late 20th-century accounts of writing
systems stressed how many different orthographies may function efficiently,
given the particular language they are used to represent. Just as linguists have
abandoned the notion of progressive evolution of languages, with some languages
ranking as more primitive than others, so historians of writing have come to
treat existing orthographies as appropriate to the languages they represent.

Nonetheless, all contemporary orthographies have a history of development, and
there are many common features in these histories. It is unlikely that writing
was invented only once and then borrowed by different cultural groups. While all
Western writing systems may be traced back to the beginnings of symbol making in
Sumer, there is no reason to believe that Asian writing systems were borrowed
from the Sumerian form. Consequently, there are two quite separate histories of
writing, that of the writing system developed by the Sumerians and that of the
one developed by the Chinese.